---
title: 0014 - MUNs
---

Quick disclaimer, this was taken from a previous post: [What Harvard MUN Was Really Like](https://manassadasivuni.com/what-harvard-mun-was-really-like/). My eyes hurt more than usual and I don't want to stress them out even more but still wanted to have something for today.

---

# Background
MUN stands for Model United Nations. What this means is that MUNs attempt to function in the same way actual UN conferences do and have many rules and procedures to closely mimic the UN. Of course, completely mimicking the entire UN with all its committees and sub-committees would be difficult for the average MUN. They do have a director in charge of each committee, making sure that all rules are being followed.

To work around this, each conference will select a committee of the UN, such as the United Nations Human Rights Council (UNHRC) or the Disarmament and International Security Committee (DISEC), or in my case, the Commission on Narcotic Drugs (CND). Within each committee, an agenda is chosen. This is usually about a particular issue that the committee currently faces. For this conference, my agenda was “Online drug trafficking”. The agenda is usually made available well before the conference actually starts. However, the fun really starts when you’re assigned a country (in my case, Belgium).

During the MUN, you will either write or help write a resolution. In the real UN, resolutions are documents that will be implemented into real scenarios. This is reflected in MUNs as resolutions are scrutinised by other delegates very carefully.

# Research
After this, you have to research your country quite extensively. I like to start by looking at the country’s list of allies, just to understand where my country sits in terms of power and influence. This usually takes some time as you have to evaluate which delegates you should lobby once committee starts. Another source is the CIA World Factbook, which has lots of general facts about the country. There are also a lot of articles on how to prepare for an MUN, one of the most well known is Best Delegate.

Once the groundwork of research has been laid, research becomes a lot more interesting. From here, your research begins to focus a lot more on the agenda. Using the example of online drug trafficking, I had to research where the drugs were being produced, how the darknet works and what Belgium has done to improve the situation. Most of this information is easily available somewhere on the internet in the form of articles but sometimes, it helps to read documents. Or more specifically, legislation.

It does sound boring on the surface, but reading the documents is critical to understanding your country’s stance on the agenda. It also helps you to understand what needs to be done and what problems need to be solved. The solutions you come up with now will be what you should push for in committee. For me, the EMCDDA was a great resource as it had all the information I needed. It also had a document suited perfectly for my agenda. Of course, all this research is useless if you don’t know when to say what.

## Position Papers
A position paper is a document, usually only one or two pages long, that sums up your research. It’s also used to show your country’s stance on the agenda. Plus, it’s useful to refer back to during committee for solutions and statistics. In some MUNs, it is mandatory to submit one to be considered for an award; there may also be a separate award for a position paper.

# MUN rules and procedure
Harvard MUN used the common set of rules that most conferences stick to, which makes it less intimidating as you don’t have to learn all these new rules. Before I explain how it all works, it helps to know some of the basics.

## Points
Points are used pretty frequently in committee and there are four kinds (arranged in importance):

- Point of personal privilege
- Point of information
- Point of order
- Point of parliamentary inquiry

Points of personal privilege are usually used when you are physically uncomfortable. This could be the room being too cold or your chair is squeaking. This is also the only point that can interrupt a speech. When a point of personal privilege is used to interrupt, it’s usually because the delegate speaking is too quiet or can’t be heard properly. It can also be used after a speech to ask the delegate to repeat a specific line from the speech

A point of information is used after speeches made in the speaker’s list. It’s used to ask the delegate questions about their speech or to question their country’s stance on the agenda.

A point of order is used to point out a factual inaccuracy. For example, say a delegate claimed that the capital of the USA was New York. That’s a factual inaccuracy. However, it cannot be used to point out “incorrect” opinions.

A point of parliamentary inquiry is used to ask the director what’s going on. This could range from, what are we doing now, all the way to asking when we’re going to take a break for lunch.

## Motions
Just like points, motions are pretty common throughout committee. They are used to vote on what should happen next. A motion passes if it has a majority of votes. There’s also a lot more of them:

- Motion for an unmoderated caucus
- Motion for a moderated caucus
- Motion to open debate
- Motion to open speaker’s list
- Motion to move into voting procedure
- Motion to divide the house

An unmoderated caucus (unmod for short) is where delegates can get up from their chairs and walk around, chat to delegates, whatever. Point is, it’s informal, but still very useful. During this time, you can talk to other members of your bloc (a group of countries allied together) about what to do next, or just chill (not a good idea). A motion for an unmoderated caucus requires you to set a duration; after time is up, you can motion to extend the unmoderated caucus by no more than half the original length. For example, if a 20 minute unmod just finished, I can motion to extend it by up to 10 minutes.

A moderated caucus is when delegates speak about a specific topic for a set duration of time and a set duration of time per speaker. What happens is that once the motion has passed, the director will ask which delegates want to speak, the delegates will raise their placard (small card with the country name on the front) and will be added into a queue of speakers. Each delegate can only make one speech. The delegate who proposed the motion must speak and can choose to speak either first or last. This is still formal debate, but you cannot use points of information. Again, you can motion to extend it by no more than half the original duration.

Motions to open debate are used at the very beginning of a session and move the session out of roll call into a debate.

Motions to open speaker’s list are used right after motions to open debate. The two are very ceremonial and delegates usually never vote against these motions. The speaker’s list has no cap on the total duration of time, but they have a limit on individual speaker’s time. The standard is usually 1 minute and 30 seconds, but this can be changed if it has a majority. Once a motion to open the speaker’s list passes, delegates raise their placards to be added to the queue of speakers. A delegate can speak more than once in the speaker’s list, but it’s polite to wait for another motion to pass before adding yourself again.

Motions to move into voting procedure are used at the very end of the conference, usually in the last session of the last day of the MUN. What they do is allow each bloc to present their resolutions to the committee. Once all of them have been presented, this motion is used to vote on which resolution to pass. Sometimes no resolutions will.

A motion to divide the house is used when there has been a vote on a resolution, but it is tied and some delegates have abstained. For example, if both resolutions have the same number of votes for and against, but 3 delegates abstained, a motion to divide the house forces them to vote.

## Resolutions
A resolution is where all the work that’s been done by committee is shown. It is the document that (is meant to) answer all questions about the agenda and provide a way forward. In the real world, resolutions have serious implications as they effectively guide countries on what actions to take. Fortunately, this is just an MUN and no one will get murdered if a resolution is not up to the mark.

Each resolution is split into a few main parts:

- Sponsors
- Signatories
- Preambulatory clauses
- Operative clauses

The sponsors are the delegates who were the authors of the resolution. Signatories are countries who either support the resolution or those who do not necessarily agree but would like to see it debated.

Preambulatory clauses set the groundwork for the resolution. They can include facts or general knowledge about the topic. More often, they are used to refere to other documents, either by the UN or by another international organisation. Preambulatory clauses must start with specific phrases and end with a comma.

Operative clauses effectively state the solutions proposed by the resolution sponsors. It helps if they directly address the perambulatory clauses above them. In addition, there can be sub-clauses to help specify exactly what actions should be taken. In general, the more detailed the operative clause, the better. There’s a list of preambulatory and operative clauses here.

If a delegate does not agree with a specific clause, they can motion to amend it. If the motion passes, the proposed change will be made to the resolution.

## Procedure
To explain this format, I’ll go through the conference sequentially. The conference will start with a speech from the director-general (person in charge of the entire conference) before each committee goes to its room and begins the session. Each session will start with a roll call, just to make sure all delegates are present. In this, there are two things you can say: “Present” or “Present and voting”. By saying “Present”, you inform the director that you are, well, present. By saying “Present and voting”, you inform the director you are in committee and that you will not abstain from voting on a resolution (more on that later). Generally, saying “Present and voting” is preferred as it shows you are willing to make a decision.

After roll call, the director will announce that they are looking for a motion to open debate, which is usually unanimous. This is followed by a motion to open the speaker’s list, which also usually passes unanimously. After a few speeches have been made, the director will ask if there are any motions for the floor. This is when the committee branches off to either a moderated or unmoderated caucus. Once those are finished, they usually loop back to the speaker’s list.

This pattern continues throughout the conference until a resolution is ready to be presented. In this case, the resolutions will be presented and debated. This is followed by a motion to move into voting procedure, where the committee decides whether or not to pass the resolution. Typically, once a resolution passes (or fails) the entire MUN conference would be drawing to a close. They usually end off with an awards ceremony followed by another speech by the director-general before declaring the conference to be finished.