---
title: 0017 - 5AM
---

I used to wake up at 5am for a few weeks. The main reason I did so was because I needed extra time to spend on homework and revision, the second reason (but just as important) was because of how peaceful it is. I don't think that there is any way you can get such a peaceful and calm environment consistently anywhere else.

I live in India, meaning that the day gets quite hot at around 8am, when the sun has been in the sky long enough that the ground is warmed up. Plus the sun rises at around 6am so even if you wake up at 7am, there's no morning mist or chill in the air. At 5am, however, there's a noticeable chill in the air which you can't get at any other time.

Plus, the city is dead silent. This  may not be true in heavily metropolitan cities like New York but it will at least be quieter. I find that the silence helps me think, but I do know that some people prefer to have the hustle and bustle of the city as white background noise. In all honesty, I have to agree with them, the silence can be _too_ quite at times.

This is the main reason I have some sort of music playing in the background while I do whatever I have to do. To fit the ambience of the early morning I tend to play quiet songs with little energy (in case you can't tell, [music](https://notes.manassadasivuni.com/0008-music/) is a big part of my life). Anyway, the songs do little else than break up the continued silence and make me feel like I'm in a lofi music video. Not a bad vibe if you ask me.

Of course, waking up at 5am means that I should sleep earlier than normal and that it can still be difficult to wake up and stay awake. I find that sleeping at 10pm ish is a good time as I don't sleep too early that I'm not even tired but it also make sure that I sleep for long enough.

This doesn't address the problem of how to stay awake though. I set an alarm using my Alexa, but if you tend to turn off an alarm and then go back to sleep I don't recommend this method. Instead, put the alarm across the room from you, or at least out of reach of your bed so that you're forced to get up and out of bed to switch it off.

If you're the kind of person who can't wake up to alarms, I really don't know a practical way to help you. You could try setting up an automated system to dump water on you when an alarm rings, but that might be inconvenient to reset every time you go to sleep. Getting someone to blow an air horn in your ear would be a much dryer solution but then you're relying on someone else being able to wake up at that time too.

One of the more obscure tips that I've found for waking up early is to get used to the time by doing something you enjoy. For example, if you want to wake up early to study or work, but really enjoy cooking, wake up at the intended time but cook instead of studying or working. This stops you from going back to sleep because your forcing yourself to do something that you don't enjoy and would rather avoid given the chance.

This does run the risk of you not doing what you originally wanted to, but it should only be for a fairly short period of time while you get used to waking up early. Once you find that you no longer have to drag yourself out of bed, you can safely switch over to your intended activity.

Not only do you get more time to work on your projects, but our entire world is structured around early mornings. This helps you get up and running way ahead of everyone giving you a competitive advantage. In fact, our society is so based around the idea of mornings that changing from a night owl to an early bird could be the single greatest positive change you can make to your lifestyle.

Just take it slow at first.

---

I recommend listening to ChilledCow's lofi radio on YouTube, it's really good